HW3
================
Amy Pitts
10/10/2020

# Problem 1

This problem uses the Instacart data. DO NOT include this dataset in
your local data directory; instead, load the data from the
p8105.datasets using:

``` r
data("instacart")
```

The goal is to do some exploration of this dataset. To that end, write a
short description of the dataset, noting the size and structure of the
data, describing some key variables, and giving illstrative examples of
observations. Then, do or answer the following (commenting on the
results of each):

``` r
head(instacart)
```

    ## # A tibble: 6 x 15
    ##   order_id product_id add_to_cart_ord… reordered user_id eval_set order_number
    ##      <int>      <int>            <int>     <int>   <int> <chr>           <int>
    ## 1        1      49302                1         1  112108 train               4
    ## 2        1      11109                2         1  112108 train               4
    ## 3        1      10246                3         0  112108 train               4
    ## 4        1      49683                4         0  112108 train               4
    ## 5        1      43633                5         1  112108 train               4
    ## 6        1      13176                6         0  112108 train               4
    ## # … with 8 more variables: order_dow <int>, order_hour_of_day <int>,
    ## #   days_since_prior_order <int>, product_name <chr>, aisle_id <int>,
    ## #   department_id <int>, aisle <chr>, department <chr>

This dataset contains 1384617 rows and 1384617 columns. This data is all
about instacart orders. Observations are at the level of items in orders
by users of the insta cart app. There are user variables/ order
variables, user ID, order ID, order data, and order hour. There are also
item variables – name, aisle, department, and some numeric codes.

Also should contain the structure of the data. For example the aisle is
realte dto the department. Also the aisle name is numberic and also is
the same as the aisle id.

  - How many aisles are there, and which aisles are the most items
    ordered from?

<!-- end list -->

``` r
instacart %>%
  count(aisle) %>%
  arrange(desc(n))
```

    ## # A tibble: 134 x 2
    ##    aisle                              n
    ##    <chr>                          <int>
    ##  1 fresh vegetables              150609
    ##  2 fresh fruits                  150473
    ##  3 packaged vegetables fruits     78493
    ##  4 yogurt                         55240
    ##  5 packaged cheese                41699
    ##  6 water seltzer sparkling water  36617
    ##  7 milk                           32644
    ##  8 chips pretzels                 31269
    ##  9 soy lactosefree                26240
    ## 10 bread                          23635
    ## # … with 124 more rows

The most things are coming from fresh vegetables and fresh friuts.

  - Make a plot that shows the number of items ordered in each aisle,
    limiting this to aisles with more than 10000 items ordered. Arrange
    aisles sensibly, and organize your plot so others can read it.

Lets make a plot

``` r
instacart %>%
  count(aisle) %>%
  filter(n > 10000) %>%
  mutate (
    aisle = factor(aisle),
    aisle = fct_reorder(aisle, n) #re-order isle according to n
  ) %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = aisle, y = n)) +
  geom_point() + 
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = 0.5, hjust = 1)) #needed to tilt the words 
```

![](p8105_hw3_ajp2257_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

  - Make a table showing the three most popular items in each of the
    aisles “baking ingredients”, “dog food care”, and “packaged
    vegetables fruits”. Include the number of times each item is ordered
    in your table.

<!-- end list -->

``` r
instacart %>% 
  filter(aisle %in% c("baking ingredients", "dog food care", "packaged vegetables fruits")) %>%
  group_by(aisle) %>%
  count(product_name) %>%
  mutate(rank = min_rank(desc(n))) %>%
  filter(rank < 4) %>%
  arrange(desc(n))# %>%
```

    ## # A tibble: 9 x 4
    ## # Groups:   aisle [3]
    ##   aisle                    product_name                                  n  rank
    ##   <chr>                    <chr>                                     <int> <int>
    ## 1 packaged vegetables fru… Organic Baby Spinach                       9784     1
    ## 2 packaged vegetables fru… Organic Raspberries                        5546     2
    ## 3 packaged vegetables fru… Organic Blueberries                        4966     3
    ## 4 baking ingredients       Light Brown Sugar                           499     1
    ## 5 baking ingredients       Pure Baking Soda                            387     2
    ## 6 baking ingredients       Cane Sugar                                  336     3
    ## 7 dog food care            Snack Sticks Chicken & Rice Recipe Dog T…    30     1
    ## 8 dog food care            Organix Chicken & Brown Rice Recipe          28     2
    ## 9 dog food care            Small Dog Biscuits                           26     3

``` r
  #knitr::kable()
```

  - Make a table showing the mean hour of the day at which Pink Lady
    Apples and Coffee Ice Cream are ordered on each day of the week;
    format this table for human readers (i.e. produce a 2 x 7 table).

<!-- end list -->

``` r
instacart %>% 
  filter(product_name %in% c("Pink Lady Apples", "Coffee Ice Cream")) %>%
  group_by(product_name, order_dow) %>%
  summarize( mean_hour = mean(order_hour_of_day)) %>%
  pivot_wider(
    names_from = order_dow,
    values_from = mean_hour
  )
```

    ## `summarise()` regrouping output by 'product_name' (override with `.groups` argument)

    ## # A tibble: 2 x 8
    ## # Groups:   product_name [2]
    ##   product_name       `0`   `1`   `2`   `3`   `4`   `5`   `6`
    ##   <chr>            <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
    ## 1 Coffee Ice Cream  13.8  14.3  15.4  15.3  15.2  12.3  13.8
    ## 2 Pink Lady Apples  13.4  11.4  11.7  14.2  11.6  12.8  11.9

# Problem 2

Accelerometers have become an appealing alternative to self-report
techniques for studying physical activity in observational studies and
clinical trials, largely because of their relative objectivity. During
observation periods, the devices measure “activity counts” in a short
period; one-minute intervals are common. Because accelerometers can be
worn comfortably and unobtrusively, they produce around-the-clock
observations.

This problem uses five weeks of accelerometer data collected on a 63
year-old male with BMI 25, who was admitted to the Advanced Cardiac Care
Center of Columbia University Medical Center and diagnosed with
congestive heart failure (CHF). The data can be downloaded here. In this
spreadsheet, variables activity.\* are the activity counts for each
minute of a 24-hour day starting at midnight.

``` r
activity = read_csv(file = "data/accel_data.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names()
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   .default = col_double(),
    ##   day = col_character()
    ## )

    ## See spec(...) for full column specifications.

  - Load, tidy, and otherwise wrangle the data. Your final dataset
    should include all originally observed variables and values; have
    useful variable names; include a weekday vs weekend variable; and
    encode data with reasonable variable classes. Describe the resulting
    dataset (e.g. what variables exist, how many observations, etc).
  - Traditional analyses of accelerometer data focus on the total
    activity over the day. Using your tidied dataset, aggregate accross
    minutes to create a total activity variable for each day, and create
    a table showing these totals. Are any trends apparent?
  - Accelerometer data allows the inspection activity over the course of
    the day. Make a single-panel plot that shows the 24-hour activity
    time courses for each day and use color to indicate day of the week.
    Describe in words any patterns or conclusions you can make based on
    this graph.

# Problem 3

This problem uses the NY NOAA data. DO NOT include this dataset in your
local data directory; instead, load the data from the p8105.datasets
package using:

``` r
data("ny_noaa")
```

The goal is to do some exploration of this dataset. To that end, write a
short description of the dataset, noting the size and structure of the
data, describing some key variables, and indicating the extent to which
missing data is an issue. Then, do or answer the following (commenting
on the results of each):

  - Do some data cleaning. Create separate variables for year, month,
    and day. Ensure observations for temperature, precipitation, and
    snowfall are given in reasonable units. For snowfall, what are the
    most commonly observed values? Why?
  - Make a two-panel plot showing the average max temperature in January
    and in July in each station across years. Is there any observable /
    interpretable structure? Any outliers?
  - Make a two-panel plot showing (i) tmax vs tmin for the full dataset
    (note that a scatterplot may not be the best option); and (ii) make
    a plot showing the distribution of snowfall values greater than 0
    and less than 100 separately by year.
